okay we are we are studying line
integrals it's very exciting right line
integrals actually today we will we will
prove a theorem a result about about
line integral which is two the first of
a series of results that I promised you
last time which relate integration in
different dimensions okay so let's talk
a little more about line integrals last
time we talked about line integrals of
vector fields okay so but actually this
is not the only kind of an eighth of a
line integral that you can have and so
today we'll talk about other kinds as
well let me remind you what we learned
last time suppose that you have a vector
field on the plane as always a vector
field can be written in two different
ways you can write it like this
or you can write it like this and you
can choose whatever way you prefer which
whichever way you like so you are given
this is a vector field okay and in
addition you are given a curve on the
plane
it's the curve with some in this case
with two boundary points but in general
you could actually also look at a closed
curve which don't have a boundary so a
line integral is a combination it's a
paring if you will the marriage of our
vector field and a curve okay so it
takes the case two objects to produce an
integral you need the vector field and
you need the curve okay
and so that integral we write like this
we write it f dot dr over c and we write
it also we write it in the following way
dr here also it stands for vector which
has two components DX and dy okay and
when you take the dot product of these
two vectors this one having these two
components and that one having those two
components you are your produce pdx plus
qdy and then we can write it down more
concretely in a way suitable for
calculation by parameterizing the curve
so we write x as a function of some
axillary variable T and Y is the
function of some auxiliary variable T
where T is between some values a and B
where say this point will correspond to
equal a and this one point will
correspond to T equal T if you do that
you can actually write it as an ordinary
integral just an ordinary 1 dimensional
integral from A to B with respect to DT
now but as always there is sort of a
sort of a price to pay and the price to
pay is that we have to replace DX by by
DT but we can't just
we can't just replace DX by DT we
rewrite it as
dx/dt times so this quantity is
reminiscent of jacobians or even earlier
in one variable cultures we always have
this factor when we made the change of
variables and this kind of factors show
up here as well right so the end result
of that is that you get T DX DT plus Q
dy DT DT and that's already an ordinary
integral in key so notice the difference
between this two here I write it I write
this integral as an integral over curve
its which is on the plane but here I
rewrite it as an integral over just the
basic interval from A to B just a basic
line segment from A to B certainly this
is much simpler than the lesson we've
been able to pass from this form to this
form by using this parameter ization
this parameterization is I already
explained many times what it does it
really identifies this complicated curve
with this simple line segment in those
are the formulas which describe how they
are identified so this is T equal a
again this is T equal B and all the
values in between creates pond to some
points on the curve all right is that
clear yes could I do one simple example
I did an example last time right
but right okay let's do that so last
time I had an example which was actually
slightly more complicated in my example
last time I had a vector field defined
in 3-space but let me just simplify that
example a little bit and get
explain it in two-dimensional in the
two-dimensional cake so example let's
say you have a curve within which X is
equal to T squared and y is equal to PQ
okay and so you have that's the curve
and keep C from 0 to 1 and then you have
the vector field which is let's just say
x times I plus XY squared and G doesn't
matter just to illustrate this ok so the
image K H what is what is the line
integral you're going to have an
integral from 0 to 1 which are this
limit and then you simply substitute
just substitute all of the stuff into
this formula so this is P this is P this
is Q all right so you get this is P and
P written in terms of the T variable is
T squared then you have to write DX DT
DX DT is 2t DT Plus now if I want to
write it exactly in that form oh just
put the detail outside plus you put XY
squared XY squared is what T to the 8th
right dy DT is 3 3 squared mg and so
then you get some very simple integral
function in T DT from zero to 1 that
clear ok so I will not I will not do
this calculation at easy
so just I'll just stop here all right so
what do what do this integrals represent
the last time we discussed last time we
discussed that this integral this
integral represents the work done by by
this by this vector field viewed as a
force vector field work done by a force
field F in moving an object or particle
along the curve C right so and when we
were deriving it the way we derived it
is that as as usual with integrals we
break the curve into small pieces right
break the curve into small pieces
we then approximate each piece by a line
segment right so let's say this is I
blow up I blow up one of those segments
so let's say this is that's this segment
right which I blow up on this board to
make it easier to keep track of things
at a small scale because the curve is
smooth we can we can approximate it well
by a line segment by linear thing okay
right straight by a piece of straight
line and so what so let's say this is
the piece number I is the piece number I
there will be right babe
in this case there may be a dozen pieces
but eventually we'll make this partition
finer and finer for the thousand million
billion so on right so let's focus on
one of those pieces when we focus on one
of those pieces we have here we have
with respect to the x-axis we have the
distances Delta X Delta X I and here it
will be Delta Y I
okay and then we will have our force
vector field and because we are in a
very small or in very small scale in a
very small piece of the curve it would
be a good approximation to think that
the vector field is just constant along
this segment because it's very small
right so it is going to look like this
and so on and so you will have some some
let's call this vector fi and so the
work done which I explained last time
remember with the raging things the work
done here is easy to find it's just a
dot product of F I and and Delta R so
that the work let's call it work number
I work done on the eyes segment is just
a dot product of this vector which is
red one and this one which is the yellow
one and this yellow vector is we'll call
it delta RI it has two components one is
Delta X I and the other one is Delta Y I
so I want to dot this two things fi dot
Delta RI both are vectors okay and more
concretely there this is going to be the
first component which will be some di
times Delta X I plus the second
component Qi times Delta Y I so that's
the work done approximately approximate
work I have to say this is really
approximate because we are making two
kinds of approximation here first of all
we are approximating the actual segment
of this curve it is curvy even though it
is very small but it's curvy in
principle but we are approximating it by
something linear that's the first
approximation we make and the second
approximation we make is that the vector
field also varies of the in general a
little bit along this segment but we are
assuming that actually it doesn't vary
so we pick a particular value somewhere
in the middle and we just assume that it
stays the same along this segment so
this is the kind of approximation that
we make at this point but the idea is
that as our partition becomes finer and
finer this approximation the error of
this approximation will go away so we'll
actually get the exact result so the
next step in other words is to take the
sum so take the total work which is the
sum of this of the work done on each of
those segments and that's approximately
now equal to 2 what to f dot fi dot
Delta RI which is all can also be
written as the sum of P I Delta X I plus
Q I Delta Y I right that's the formal we
get I'm essentially repeating what I
said last time but you'll see why you
will see in a minute why I want to
repeat this so as always with integrals
this sum as the partition becomes finer
actually tends to the integral to what
we call the integral so that's how we
end up with this integral and what
integral well it will have F dot what we
call dr so delta r under this limit
becomes a differential v r so we get FDR
that's this line integral which we are
which we are talking about now precisely
as a total work done along the curve and
also you can think in terms of you can
also think in terms of this expression
which is a more detailed expression for
this dot product so that's how you get
this second formula on the left board
which is a P DX plus Q dy right the same
thing it's just writing the dot product
in components so that's what we've done
so far and that's goal line integral
line integral of a vector field and I
think the terminology is a little bit
misleading because it suggests as the
line suggests that we are integrating
over something linear but we're not well
I guess line here means to represent the
fact that we are doing a one dimensional
integral so something which is also you
know line is one dimensional so that's
why
called line integral but in fact I would
rather call it a curve curve integral or
a curve integral because we're really
integrating over curve so what I would
like to say now is that this is not the
only type of line integral let's follow
the standard terminology the only type
of line integral that we can have as you
see in this line integral what we are
doing is at the end of the day we are
calculating expression like this where
there are two types of terms one is has
this form some function x DX and the
second one is some function x dy so this
already makes you wonder what is DX and
dy that what is it that allows us to
insert them under the integral and make
the integration that's the first
question
and the second natural question is
whether there is something else like DX
dy that we could use potentially also to
produce line integrals or integrals over
the curves and the answer is that yes
that there are actually other ways to
produce line integrals which are also
meaningful from the point of view of
applications which have a different
interpretation they're not as work done
by force and then and in trying to
generalize it we simply have to go back
and look at this picture one more time
so what exactly what is the structure of
the integral that we obtain well the
structure is really the structure of the
integral is really dictated but what
we've done at one of the segments of
this segment number I what we've done is
we've taken the dot product between this
vector fi and the the displacement
vector along this segment of the curve
but that was that that expression came
from physics that was because we tried
to find the work done by by this force
but let's look at the result the result
is really the sum of these two
expressions VI Delta X I and Qi adle -
weii these are really the basic
expressions that we have written down
for this ice segment which have it
eventually led us to consider those
integrals so if we want to generalize
this integrals we should look we should
do it at this step once we write the ice
storm essentially there is no choice
there will be a particular integral
as the limit when we sum up over all I
write so we see what are we doing so we
have this segment and let's focus on
this term for example so this term has
is the product of two factors the first
factor is some value of some function so
it's some number essentially but this
number depends on the i's segment so at
the end of the day when we take the
limit this would become a function so
it's it's some particular quantity which
that we attach to this segment but the
second factor is actually has a
geometric meaning the second factor has
something to do with the shape of this
segment it actually is the length of the
projection of this line segment onto the
X onto the x coordinate of course
somewhere in the background
I imagine the coordinate system XY
coordinate Z okay and so this is the
projection of this vector onto the x
axis whereas Delta Y is the projection
onto this vector right so the the way to
produce this integral in other words is
to combine two things one is a function
like P and the other one is some length
and this length could be the length of
the projection onto the x-axis or it
could be the projection onto the y-axis
and if somebody comes and chooses
another coordinate system for example
polar coordinate system which would have
instead of XY would have R and theta
they could also take the displacement
with respect to one of the coordinates
of that system for example instead of
Delta X and Delta Y you could have taken
Delta R or Delta Theta if you were
working with polar coordinates so in
other words there are many choices here
we choose Delta X and Delta Y for two
reasons first of all there is a vary in
this case there is a very nice physical
interpretation of the result of the
resulting integral and second of all our
XY coordinate system is somehow the most
basic coordinate system that we can have
there is however one quantity one
geometric quantity one length attached
to this picture which is somehow
intrinsic and that depends on any
coordinate and that's just the length of
this interval so in retrospect even
though we've gotten now with very nice
integrals which have this very nice
interpretation is the work done by force
and so and so on we can now go back and
see that actually the perhaps the most
natural thing to do now that we're
starting to analyze it in more detail
would be to take instead of Delta X or
Delta Y just Delta s namely the length
of this segment right so this way we get
a different type of line integral
different type of line integral is
obtained if we take instead of Delta X
or Delta Y say Delta X I or Delta Y I we
take Delta s I which is the length of
the segment length of the segment
alright so what do we get in this case
so in this case let's call this now
let's call this Delta s I and of course
Delta si is nothing but the square root
of Delta X I squared plus Delta Y I
squared right so how about taking
instead of instead of this expression
take the expression in fact maybe let me
go on this let me go on this board
[Applause]
so that we can follow the analogy more
closely so take the expression instead
of this one take the expression some put
some fi where F is some function some
number on it is some number because it's
attached to the I statement times Delta
F Phi which you can also write as fi
square root of Delta x squared plus
Delta Y squared okay so if we take the
sum now of this expression we take the
sum of this expressions this will tend
to a different kind of integral she will
still be an integral over C you will
have we have F times DX squared plus dy
squared so then of course we ask what
does it mean to take to have such an
integral well to do justice to such an
integral we really should parameterize
the curve the way we did here so let's
put let's go back to this permutation
when we parametrize it like this we have
we get this axillary variable t so now
our curve gets replaced for all intents
and purposes by a simple line interval
makes things much easier so we will end
up with an integral again from A to B
over the subsidiary variable we'll have
here F where we substitute X as a
function of T and Y is the function of T
and then here I will make a trick I will
divide everything by D by Delta by DT
and multiplied by DT okay but if I
divide by DT that means that under the
square root I divide by DT squared so I
will end up with DX DT squared dy DT
squared and
you had a question why did I change it
to Delta s why are we doing all the
tentacles in the first place because we
have to know because you know because
this is where we have to do in this
class but no because this integral makes
sense and then you need it in
applications for example if you want to
calculate the work done by by force by
the way this is not the only application
of line integrals we'll talk more about
about them today by the fundamental
theorem but for instance if you look at
the end of that of that section sixteen
point two in the exercises there is
discussion of the sort of the amperes
law and amperes law is about line
integrals of magnetic field caused by by
current going to say you have a current
going through a wire and this causes
magnetic field so you would like to know
the force of that magnetic field and you
can find what the line integral that
magnetic field is by knowing the current
along this this wire okay I'm getting to
your answer to the answer of your
question okay
I'm this is the introduction to the
answer all right so so this was the
reason I'm explaining now a different
type of integral and I will explain now
that this these two has application to
something meaningful okay so but you can
think about it you can think about these
integrals from two points of view one is
the kind of utilitarian point of view
which means why do I need this what is
the situation where I actually need this
integral and this this would have
answers you for line into so vector
fields you have work done by force for
example but more than that for instance
amperes law can be understood in terms
of line line integrals this type of
integrals as I've explained now will
allow you to to calculate things like
masses of wires I'll get to this in a
minute okay so this is sort of
utilitarian point of view a second point
of view is the more it's a more abstract
point of view we certainly know the
utility of integrals in general okay but
so far in one variable calculus we would
only calculate interval the function
over DT what I try to explain in last
lecture is that you really you can
understand the most the most beautiful
results in calculus by developing the
most general possible integrals that you
can take the theory of most general
integrals so you can you can stand on
the point of view of why are we doing so
I will turn your question around your
question was why don't we just stay with
this why do we take Delta si is it just
to make our lives more complicated I
would turn it around and I say why only
this now that we understand this why not
do something more general you see and
then see if that has some interpretation
so the integrals I'm talking about that
the most general integrals over a
general curve on the plane that's the
answer and this is one example or
perhaps I mean this example leads to
this integral this is one example this
is an example of an integral of a vector
field and this is another example okay
you had a question that's right that's
right you're right so this Delta si is
approximately equal to the length of the
segment
when I wrote length length of a segment
I was implicitly referring to this line
segment which was approximating my curve
but if you would like to think of Delta
si as the original one and it would be
approximate a d as no it's always that
the es is always the the differential
right so it is a linear it is a linear
in linear increment it is a linear
increment so
uestion is about approximation well it's
in some sense is true it depends on how
exactly you introduce the notation that
is introduced in a certain way you write
that's what will happen okay so okay so
I've given you this sort of a pep talk
about the utility of integrals but now I
have to explain what what is this useful
for and this is useful for calculating
things like links like the total length
for example what is the total length of
this curve the total length of this
curve is such an integral where the
function f is 1 you see so this is the
point ok so so this integral if F is
equal to 1 for example by the way there
is annotation for this which we'll call
let's call DF so then if F is 1 F DF is
just the integral of D F this is just a
length arc length I've seen which of
course something which we discussed
before what we are doing now is we are
generalizing that definition of the arc
length by allowing an arbitrary function
instead of 1 and this is something which
is useful because let's suppose that you
have a wire a thin wire in the shape of
this curve and let's suppose you want to
find the mass of this wire okay so mass
of the wire is a funny thing
well okay
I guess was something else which one me
so we want to find mass of this work now
but if the if the wire if it is
homogeneous that's going to be the same
as the length or it's going to be
proportional to the length with some
coefficient but suppose that it's
heavier on this side and it's lighter on
this side so it's not homogeneously what
you have is a density function this is
very similar to when we discuss masses
of two-dimensional two-dimensional
object so you're dealing with some
density function and that will be your
function f and to compute the total mass
you have to integrate this function f
with respect to this with respect to
this vs respect to this measure in
mathematics this kind of obstacle
measures I'm trying to explain to you is
that the structure of this integrals of
this line integrals the basic structure
of the synchros is as follows
it's always the integrand is always the
product which can be thought of as a
product of something which is external
like density mass density or vector
field and something which is internal
something which is intrinsic to that
curve and something which has to do with
the measurements along the curve it
could be it could be the length of the
projection onto the x axis could be the
length of the projection onto the y axis
or it could be the length itself each
time you get a particular integral ok so
these are the two types of install and I
know that it is a little bit confusing
because it looks like you have this two
different things and if you especially
if you did in the book I think it is
very confusing so what I was trying to
explain to you is why you have why there
is such a variety of integrals and what
is the relation between them okay
questions
right that's right so what in other
words what you're saying is see absorbed
you can observe the analogy between the
following terms pdx qdy or FGS right so
you have the three different types of
quantities which are allow you're
allowed to integrate right and they the
first the first factor here is something
which is external it has to do with
vector field or function like mass
density function of the wire and things
like that
right the second one is intrinsic to the
curve itself it has to do with measuring
things along this curve here you measure
something along the X Direction here you
measure something along the Y Direction
here you just take the length of this
little piece for each P and these are
not all these are not all possible ways
because well this is in some sense this
is the most intrinsic one because the
length is the length right it doesn't
know about coordinates this is already a
little bit arbitrary because we have
chosen a particular coordinate system
and as we know there are many coordinate
systems and there is essentially there
is no preferred one right because for
example I could rotate the x and y
coordinate system so that's already a
new coordinate system and we we've
learned to appreciate other coordinate
systems for example when we did double
integrals amongst the coordinate systems
we know is the polar coordinate system
so in fact you could also have
expressions like PDR or qg theta that's
also loud you see and each time you have
such an integral the way you compute it
is you parameterize your curve and you
reduce the integral to the integral over
a line segment on that on on the X on
the Hillary T line right so in the first
in the case of a line integral of a
vector field you end up with this
integral right and in the case of a
second type of integral end up with this
type of integral but in both cases you
get an integral
just along the line segment on the key
line okay so so this was to explain the
different types of integrals because I
know that this is something which drives
people crazy because the way it's
explained in the book I think is not
really how should I say there's not
enough motivation given and so what I
try to do is to motivate motivate them
and explain the difference but I have to
say that we mostly will be interested in
in line integrals of vector fields not
integrals of functions so much with
respect to the measured es but line
integrals of vector fields this will be
our main concern and here now we will
talk about the first example over of a
kind of a fundamental theorem of
calculus apply to this type of integrals
so to explain this I have to introduce a
particular kind of vector field which is
actually something we've learned before
so let's let's let's remember the notion
of gradient right gradient so if you
have a function again I work on the
plane so it's a function of two
variables we can we can take partial
derivatives of this function we have F
sub I X and F sub y then we can put them
together in what we call the the
gradient vector
right it's a gradient vector when we
studied the gradient we talked about the
gradient attached to a particular point
XY so it would be a particular point XY
we would evaluate the gradient so we
have a vector for that particular point
so it's kind of a static object it was
attached to a particular point
but in bridge but if you look at this
formula it looks like actually we have a
vector-valued function we actually have
a vector attached to each point so this
is precisely a kind of thing that we now
call a vector field so we can now look
at the gradient and we and recognize
that the gradient of a function is
actually a vector field this is a vector
field why because at each point you have
a vector at each point XY you have a
vector namely the two parts of the
vector combining the two partial
derivatives of this function at this
point and such vector fields are called
conservative and conservative here is
not meant to be like conservative
liberal but it's more it's due to the
different etymology of the word
conservative because it conserves
something it has to do with conservation
which is something we'll talk about
later so let's call conservative
easy to remember now at Berkeley we
don't like conservative things right
but this respect refills are good no no
problem
so what can we say about line integrals
of conservative vector field so this
would be the main subject of the of the
of the rest of this lecture it turns out
that with for such vector fields we
actually have an analogue of the
fundamental theorem of calculus of the
one variable culture which looks as
follows
so I preserve I keep the same picture I
have the kumite curve C and I can see
their line integral of a vector field
it's just that now my vector field is
going to be a gradient vector field or
conservative vector field it is a
gradient of a function f and what can we
learn about line integrals of such
vector fields so it turns out that we
have the following beautiful formula so
on the left hand side we have to have
the just a line integral of this vector
field over this curve and on the right
hand side we just evaluate this function
at the end points
okay so you see this is the first type
of result that I promised last time I
promise last time that we will have
results of the following nature well on
the left hand side we'll have an
integral over some domain G of something
which is a derivative of another object
and on the right hand side we'll have an
integral of the over the boundary of the
domain of that object itself and so you
see in this particular case perhaps I
should I should explain that this is
point a and this is point B so in this
particular case your domain your domain
D is this curve and the boundary of this
domain consists of two points B and a so
indeed on the Left we get an integral
over C and on the right we just get the
values at the two end points this is the
boundary this is the boundary so what is
omega here Omega is in this particular
case is just our function f so this this
integral just means evaluating this
function f at the point B minus value
point a you have question shouldn't be a
double integral on the left hand side
well I'm sorry
here right so the question is whether we
should put some double integrals on the
right but see this is a very schematic
form so I'm not keeping track of how
many integration signs in fact well up
to now we have an agreement that if it's
a double integral we put two integral
signs if it's a triple integral for
three integral signs but in join in in
general you can just say all of them are
integrals right so you
we will know what kind of ethical it is
by looking at the domain of integration
the two dimensional three dimensional
one dimensional right so let's is
kinetic but you write if to be
consistent with the old notation the
number of integration signs on the left
would have to be greater by one than the
number of integration signs on the right
so maybe this minus one or something I
don't the number minus one minus one and
here will be certain number of
integration signs right well in this in
this particular case we do have a single
integral on the left right because it's
an integral over the curve and on the
right we have an integral over zero
dimensional object and usually integral
over zero dimensional object we never
use the integration sign for that there
will be zero integration sign because
the zero dimensional object and
integration over zero dimensional set is
just evaluating your function at the
points of that set with signs though so
it's important which signs you are which
signs we are taking and let me explain
that that's actually very important
point you see when I primate right when
I parameterize my curve this gives it
Aryan tation because I when I identify
this curve with this line segment I'm
using this line segment I have a natural
orientation I'm going from lower value
to higher level value from lower to how
to create a value like so here is
smaller is less than B of course because
I write it like it so when I identify my
curve C with that line interval this
also I can it allows me to to move
variant a Shinto to the curve in other
words the curve inherits orientation of
that interval which if this point
corresponds to this and this points
correspond to that variant ation would
be like this but if it was the other way
around there in tation would be in the
opposite direction so in this equation
we're taking the curve oriented from A
to B so it goes like this from A to B
and then on the right hand side we take
the endpoint evaluated the function at
that point minus the evaluate at the
initial point so it has to be consistent
because if it's not consistent you will
get an equation with the wrong sign
you'll have an overall sign okay yes
what does F stand for this one it was on
this board but I could close it F is the
function f of X Y what is the big gap
there is no bigger here right okay
so the question is we see big F be graph
there but we should be left here but we
don't see big F there right so this is
what I explained I said this is the most
general line integral we take a most
general vector field and we take the
line integral amongst all vector fields
there are special ones which are called
conservative a vector field F is called
conservative if it can be written as
nabla F as gradient of some function not
all vector fields are like this but from
now on or at this moment we focus just
on this conservative vector field vector
fields which have this shape nabla F in
this case the line integral will look
like this because the vector field is
nabla F so we just put this number air
from the four nodes so that that's the
line integral the statement of this
theorem which is called a theorem about
fundamental theorem for line integrals
line integral
he is that in this particular in this
particular case the line integral of
this vector field can be written in a
much simpler way it's just the
difference of the values of the function
at the end points you see so this is the
first of all and say that this is a
natural generalization of the
fundamental theorem of calculus in which
we learned four functions in one
variable yes
that it very good so the question is
that it means that the path going from A
to B doesn't really matter and this is
absolutely correct and this is one of
the most important corollary of this
because on the left hand side it looks
like the integral depends on the choice
of the path we could go like this or we
could go like this you can go like this
or maybe just take the most boring one
just a straight line right but on the
right nothing tells nothing uses their
shape of the curve only the end points
so this formula immediately tells us
that actually this line integral which a
priori dip which a priori depends on the
choice of the path C actually does not
only depend on the end point and that's
one of the most beautiful things about
it which you don't see which you without
you know really analyzing this in detail
we won't be able to see that so it's a
first curve surprising fact about line
integrals and I'm getting to it in a
moment but before I get to this I wanted
to
[Applause]
before I get to this I want to to
compare I want to compare this formula
to the formula which we started with
last time which is the fundamental
theorem of calculus for functions in one
variable which is that if you have a
function in one variable then we have
the formula like this where you
integrate over line segments from A to B
and that's F of B minus F of a so you
see there is a clear connection between
the two formulas clear analogy between
the two formulas in both cases on the
Left we have a single integral integral
of something which is a derivative here
is a function one variable so there's
only one derivative here we have a
function in two variables so there isn't
a single derivative but there is a
gradient and what we can do is we can
take the line integral of the gradient
vector field and on the right hand side
is exactly the same is just evaluating
at the end point and taking the
difference so in fact this is a special
case of this more general formula this
is a special treat we have now
generalized the fundamental theorem of
1-dimensional calculus to the case of
line integrals over arbitrary curves
okay now let's look at this in more
detail and let's try to figure out some
consequences of this what is it good for
and the first consequence is the one
which has already been observed is the
independence of the line integral of the
path which is really striking if you
think about it because earlier today I
wrote some formula for line integral
right some specific example in this
example
it was sort of a painstaking process
because I had to first of all
parameterize my curve right then I had
to express my vector field in terms of
this parameter ization and I had to take
the derivatives of x and y and I had to
put all this together and then find the
integrate right so it's a lot of work
but now what this formula is telling me
is that instead of doing all of that
instead of going through this
complicated process what I could do is
just take some fun there is some
function f so that the result the result
is just just a difference between the
values of this function at the end point
you see
so this is really striking fat it's a
shortcut
it is a shortcut so now you're happy
okay so everybody's happy when things
become in here I guess but you know
sometimes to get things easier you have
to first make things more complicated to
to make the meteorite so I think it was
I forgot who it was it said that it was
a physicist I think it was Edward Teller
who said it's like what's your what is
your goal in life and he said my goal in
life is to make complicated things easy
and easy things complicated so in a
sense that's not why necessarily my goal
in this class but I agree that this is
certainly simplification the right hand
side we will all agree that the right
hand side is much simpler than the left
hand side right but there is a caveat if
the caveat to this because this does not
apply to all vector fields this only
applies to vector fields which are
conservative so if your vector field is
not conservative you're out of luck
there is no simplification you have to
go through this process you see but
there is a huge class of vector fields
for which this up to which the supplies
and now we will discuss to which class
to which a vector field how to find out
how to see whether your rector field is
a good one alert makes it allows for
such a simplification okay but before I
do that I would like to derive the
consequences of this
or is called corollaries the corollary
one is that if f is conservative if I
have the conservative vector field which
is number sorry if conservation say each
conservative when I say it's
conservative it means that the recent
function f small such that F is equal to
number left that function the gradient
of that function then the line integral
of this vector field is independent of
the curve depends only on the end points
on the end points in other words this is
equal to the integral over a different
curve for any of any other curve
provided that that other curve has the
same end point what I mean by this of
course just what I have already drawn
here but let me do it one more time so
let's say you have this has this two end
points but so that's there yes there is
this and so on I don't want to leave the
blackboard but you could you could I
could walk all over all over the this
classroom and and then go outside and
aspro Plaza and come back and as long as
I start here and come back here the line
integral no matter how complicated it
would be to calculate it the result
would be the same you see so this is
really striking this is really striking
fact which enables us if the question on
the test would be calculate over this
curve it looks complicated but you know
right away that instead you could you
could calculate say over the straight
line which is much easier you see so
this really allows for great
simplification
another way to phrase this another way
to phrase it is the full length again
will be under the assumption that F is a
conservative vector field that if you
integrate over a closed curve a closed
curve is one which which does not have
endpoints which does not have a boundary
I'll draw it like this so this is called
will call this such a curve a closed
curve closed curve does not have a
boundary we talked about this last time
like a circle for example its boundaries
is empty okay so if you integrate over
this you will always get zero so in this
case you don't even need to choose a
simplest path you just know that you get
zero how to see that well let's pick a
point here okay so you can think of this
point you can think of this curve as a
curve with the boundary but it's
boundary in its boundary this one point
appears in two different ways first of
all it appears as the initial point
something that I have previously called
a but second of all the same point
appears also is the end point which
point which I call B which I've
previously called B right it's one at
the same point if you do this integral
according to the fundamental theorem for
line integrals and we are allowed to do
this because I mean under the assumption
that my vector field is a gradient of a
function then we know that this integral
is equal to the difference between the
values at the point B and point a but
point V and a are the same
so when I take the difference I get zero
you see so this is equal to it's an
explanation F of B minus F of a zero
right because it's the same point so in
fact these two statements are equivalent
to each other for the following reason
if you have two paths we see in this
statement which I call corollary one the
emphasis is on the fact that if you have
two cores connecting two points
connecting the same points then the
answer is the same right but if I
suppose I know that for any closed curve
for any closed curve the integral is
zero right this is also implied this
fact will be implied why because let me
do it on a separate I'm a separate board
[Applause]
so suppose I already know know that
integral over closed curve any closed
curve of FDR is zero well I claim that
this means that integral over C and I
mean any and here I mean it really any
any closed curve anywhere if I have an
integral over some curve C this will be
equal to the integral of course C prime
as long as they have the same the same
endpoint right how would I prove this
well so here's my curve C and here is my
curve C Prime
right so this is C and this is C prime
so to prove this is the same as to prove
that this minus this is 0 but what is
what is this minus this it means that I
go like this and but then I change
orientation on this one so I go so this
is minus C prime going like this so it
means I go like this and go like this
these two curves together combine into a
closed curve for which the interval is 0
you see that's how I get that this is 0
so C minus C prime is the closed curve
is this clear any questions about this
how many people have followed this
argument thank you
ok how many people have not followed
exciting don't be afraid everybody you
didn't not quite okay so what what's the
second point
right so now so so the this argument was
clear that why this argument was clear
why the why the integral over the closed
curve is zero because you have the same
initial and end points so what I'm
trying to explain now is that suppose I
know suppose I have an integral suppose
I have a vector field such that for any
closed curve for any closed curve the
integral is zero I want to say I want to
demonstrate that in that case the
integral over any curve even with
boundary like this would necessarily be
equal to the integral over any other
curve with the same body I would like in
other words I would like to derive this
formula from this formula and the way I
do it is I say okay
what what is so I wanted to show that
this is equal to this but it's the same
as saying that this minus this is 0 ok
and now I explain that the difference
between the two integrals is actually
could be thought of as an integral over
the curve which is C that is original
one this 1 minus C Prime
but C minus C prime is actually a closed
curve so I since I had assumed that were
all closed curves it will 0 this implies
that this difference is 0 so this was
just to say that these two properties
are actually equivalent to each other so
you should not think of this corollary
one and corollary two as two separate
statements one is path independent one
is path independent the integral is the
same over all paths with the same
endpoints the other one in the statement
that the integral over any closed curve
is 0 and the point is that these two
statements are equivalent to each other
ok now
so where does it where does it leave us
so we we see now that if you have a if
you have a conservative vector field
things simplify let's just put it this
way things simplify a lot so of course
then the next question is how do we find
out if a given vector field is
conservative or not because if it is
conservative we can apply this and we
have this all these nice properties and
if it's not then we have to use other
methods so this now is really the
question how do you determine whether f
is conservative and if it is how to find
the function function f such that this
vector field is the gradient of F that's
the question so as a warm-up
let's observe one property of
conservative vector field so we are
given let's suppose that F is
conservative so f is PQ f is PQ and
let's suppose that it is conservative so
f is number F so then I was just start
with from the other end let's suppose it
is conservative what can we say about it
but what kind of properties does it have
so again if we did conservative then
then I F of B minus F of a is the line
integral right that's that's the formula
to have but this is still way too
abstract first of all we talked about
some curves and things like that I would
like some very simple algebraic criteria
where I don't do any integration but
just look at the components P Q and I
would like to have a criterion to say
whether it's conservative or not yes
does it have a proof are we going to
prove it in this class well I was hoping
to prove it in this class but I may run
out of time today so the proof is very
simple and it's it's in the book the
proof is follows almost immediately from
the fundamental theorem of 1-dimensional
calculus when you just spell out what
this means in other words when you
parameterize the curve and substitute
everything you just you get on the nose
the elemental theorem of 1-dimensional
calculus ok so I would like an algebraic
criterion you see I would like an
algebraic criterion which does not
involve any curves or any integration so
see what does this mean this means that
P is f sub X and Q is f sub y for some
function y
so here's what I can do I cannot compare
these two guys because a priori you know
the two partial derivatives are a priori
have nothing to do nothing to do with
each other
but what I can do is I can I can kind of
equalize them in the following way I can
take P sub y I can take the partial
derivative of P with respect to Y if I
do that I get F X Y right on the other
hand I can take Q sub X that's the
partial derivative cubed respect to X
and that's F Y X right so now remember
our good friend Cleo told us that if you
have a function which had continuous
first partial derivatives that it
doesn't matter in which order you take
second partial derivatives that these
two things are actually equal to each
other and equal to each other so what
does it mean it means that if your
vector field is conservative it will
this property will necessarily have to
hold in other words P sub y will have to
be equal to Q sub X that's very simple
maybe I keep this but I
[Applause]
so we conclude that in this case P sub y
is equal to Q sub X or if you will DT dy
is equal to DQ DX here's an example so
let's say the vector field is y e to the
X plus sine Y times I plus e to the X
plus X cosine y plus 2y J so this is P
and this is Q so let me ask you this
question is this vector field
conservative okay so in other words
conservative would mean that there exist
some function there is some function
above it such that you get this by
taking F sub X and you get this by
taking F sub y it's very very difficult
to get right away just by looking at
those two those two functions it's very
difficult to guess whether it's such a
function f exists you see because it's
like you should be able to extract in
some sense they aren't derivative in in
x and y and see that the result is
somehow the same right but now we have a
very simple criterion as to whether it
is conservative or not because we can
argue as follows we can say well if it
is conservative then vpy would have to
be equal to DQ X are they equal so the
actual question is are they equal so
let's calculate what is DP dy
GPD y is e to the X plus cosine Y
everybody agrees with that yes okay
and now DQ DX is e to the X plus cosine
Y the same okay so there is a chance
that it is conservative I have not yet
so so far what I've said is that if the
vector field is conservative then this
has to hold and we see that they are
equal so there is the put there is a
potential there is a possibility that
they that this vector field is in fact
conservative but it's a result in fact
that in this particular case this is not
on the necessary condition but it is a
sufficient condition and this field
electric field is in fact conservative
so how do we what is what is what is the
precise statement and how do we find
this function f in this particular case
so by the way for this particular vector
field then it would be very easy to
calculate its line integrals you don't
need to parameterize anything you know
any curves and so on
you just find this function f and you
evaluate that function at the end points
for example if there are no end points
if it's a closed curve you know the
answer is zero right away C so it's a
I'm sorry how to find the function f I'm
getting to this no no you haven't lost
anything okay so what we've established
so far is that if if if F is
conservative then vq d pd y DQ g f in
other words this statement implies this
statement but actually the claim is that
the converse is also true that if this
formula is true DP dy is equal to Q DX
then there exists a function f such that
vector field is a gradient vector under
one assumption the converse or the
converse is also true under the
assumption
that the vector field is defined on the
region which is simply connected region
in in in r21 when I talk about the
fields I defined on the plane right so
it's defined on a region in r2 which is
simply connected so I have to explain
what simply simply connected means
simply connected simply means it doesn't
simply mean it it's connected it's a
different property so you see the
connected connected is easy connected
means that this is disconnected right
this is disconnected this is connected
so this we know that's easy right
connect with me there's only one Peters
there's only one piece you cannot
separate the object but simply connected
is a slightly more sophisticated
property so well I drew it for I drew it
in the case of two-dimensional regions
but if you want since we talked about
one-dimensional objects curves maybe
it's better to just talk about this
curve as opposed the curve which is the
union of these two as opposed to curve
which is just this one so this is
connected and this is disconnected but
simply connected region or well it's two
in both in both settings it's true for
course or it can be true for for these
regions like this because as you like
but simply connect something more
complicated simply connected means that
any curve that you can draw on in your
region
let's suppose you have a region like
this simply connected means that if you
draw any curve in this region like any
closed curve like this you can you can
deform it so that so as to under the
deformation it all collapses into one
point within the region right so in this
particular case I can deform it I can
make it smaller smaller smaller and like
this okay
now contrast this to the key list of
region which has a hole so it's like
annulus right so in this case if I take
this loop
I cannot deform it continuously to a to
a point collide I cannot collapse it
into one point because I can make it
smaller all right I can make it even
more smaller but I cannot pass through
this hole if you so simply connected put
it in the put put in the most
down-to-earth terms is is the region
which doesn't have any holes and the
hole actually if it even if it's just
the region without with one point thrown
away it's already not simply connected
so this is simply connected simply
connected and this is not and this is
not because even here because this point
is thrown out I cannot pass by this path
and this turns out to be the only
obstacle to the converse statement which
is kind of a mile a mile it's really a
wild restriction because to begin with
most of our vector fields are actually
defined on the entire plane right for
example this vector field
he's surely defined on the entire plane
in other words you can put any X&Y and
it makes sense the foremost makes sense
right so and the entire plane is
certainly simply connected right so or
any any any disk on it on the plane is
simply connected it's only when the
vector field is not defined at a
particular point or is not defined on
there is some some hole like this that
you cannot apply this result you see in
fact in the in the homework and one of
the exercise of the homework there is an
example of a vector field on which is
defined on an on simply connected domain
for which what we are going to do now
does not work for which this precedes
this implication this way does not work
this is explained in a book yes very
good point so these are actually
connected these are all connected right
because it's only one piece I cannot
separate it into two pieces it's only
one piece right so so that's why I
talked about connectivity first because
I wanted to emphasize that actually
these are two different properties you
can have a connected region but not
simply connected okay let us let us
assume though that our region our vector
field is defined on a simply connected
domain for example this vector field is
because it's defined on the entire plane
and the plane for sure is is simply
connected then I claim that actually the
converse theorem is true which means
that if you know that GPG y is equal to
DQ GX which is what we actually found to
be the case for our vector field then
there exist the function f so that our
vector field is a gradient of that F so
now the only question remains how do we
find this F right and that's done by
very simple algorithm by very simple
algorithm
where we simply take antiderivative of
this component of the vector field and
antiderivative of the component of the
vector field
so let's find F in our example so what
I'm going to do is I'm going to take
this I'm going to take this P and I'm
going to take it sine 2 derivative
because P is so we're looking for a
function f such that this is the
derivative back to X and this with
respect to Y but if so we should be able
to find F by taking antiderivative of
this respect to X right so take
antiderivative antiderivative of e with
respect to X what do we get well so in
other words with respect to X means that
we treat Y as a constant note that the
function not the variable is a constant
and X is the variable so when we take
the antiderivative we get Y e to the X
plus X sine Y don't be surprised that
you get X sine Y because even though
it's a sine Y but it's a sine of Y which
is which is now treated as a constant so
this is treated for all intents and
purposes the constant with respect to X
so we just put an X in front that's what
gives us the antiderivative now if we
were in one variable calculus we
actually wouldn't stop here we would
write a constant right this was very
important to always remember that you
can only write a constant Y because when
you take the derivative constant
disappears right so there isn't a unique
antiderivative there is a 90 derivative
up to addition of a constant but now we
have two variables so this should be a
constant with respect to the X variable
but it may very well depend on Y so what
we should do the only difference from
the old calculations is that you
put dependence on Y and now we find this
function of Y by comparing to the result
for 4q I mean calculating the so we sort
of go zigzagging like this we start here
with a country derivative but we get
some indeterminancy so we we resolve the
indeterminacy by going back to by a to
the second derivative to F of F sub y
right so let's take the first step like
this second is differentiate with
respect to Y what do you get you get e
to the X plus X cosine y plus G prime of
Y that's what we get but this is what we
should get we should get e to the X plus
X cosine y plus 2y so we recognize the
first two terms have appeared and now we
want to find what is C prime well
comparing to the formula for Q we find
that C prime is 2y and that means that C
of Y is y squared plus a constant
which is now a known as constant because
now we are dealing with a function one
variable right so the answer is this
this function plus y squared plus a
constant and that's how you find the
function f for conservative vector field
alright so we'll continue next time have
a good weekend